Every year federal and state governments allocate budgets to reduce poverty. By knowing the effect of different variables such as education, unemployment, geographical regions, population size, and closeness to metropolitan areas on the poverty level across U.S. counties, the federal and state governments could maximize the efficiency of the budget allocation in terms of reducing the poverty. The goal of this project is to predict the poverty level of each U.S. county based on four education levels, unemployment level, rural urban continuum code (RUCC) and geographical region of the county. The four education levels are less than high school, high school diploma, some college or associate degree, and bachelors or higher degree. The four education level and the unemployment level are represented in percentages. RUCC is a classification scheme that distinguishes metropolitan counties by the population size of their metro area, and nonmetropolitan counties by degree of urbanization and adjacency to a metro area. The range of RUCC is from one to nine. The geographical regions include south, west, northeast and midwest.

Three datasets were processed in this project. Multiple techniques of data cleaning including validating data, dealing with missing and duplicate data, and merging were used to obtain the final DataFrame which included more than 3100 samples. The response variable was the logarithmic transformation of the poverty instead of its original format in percentage; in this way, the predicted poverty would be the exponent of the response variable, and therefore, it would be always positive. The distribution of the response variable was quite close to the normal distribution.

The histogram of the numerical features indicated all of them had some outliers. The sum of the four education levels was 100 for each sample, and therefore, one of them had to be removed to avoid collinearity; ‘bachelors/higher’ was removed since it had more outliers than the other education levels. In order to address the outliers in the remaining numerical features,  they were capped and/or floored by conservative thresholds. The heatmap of numerical features was also investigated; no highly correlated features were found. Pair plots were used to visually analyze the relationship between the response variable and the numerical features. According to the pair plots, ‘less_than_high_school’ and ‘unemployment’ had the highest impact on the poverty among the four numerical features. Pair plots between the response variable and the logarithmic transformation of numerical features were also investigated; they showed the relationship between the logarithmic transformation of  some numerical features and the response variable was slightly more linear than the relationship between their original format and the response variable. 

In order to investigate the impact of categorical features on the response variable, two box plots were created to show the distribution of the poverty log across all levels of each categorical feature. According to the box plot of RUCC, RUCC 1 overall had the lowest poverty, while RUCC 4-9 had the highest. The box plot of region also showed southern counties overall had the highest poverty while counties in northeast and midwest had the lowest. 

Four models were developed to predict the logarithmic transformation of the poverty; linear regression, support vector regressor, random forest, and xgboost. Techniques such as scaling, adding interaction terms, and parameter tuning were used to improve the models.The linear regression model which included a scaler and second-degree nonlinear and interaction terms was chosen because of its average 5-fold cross validation score as well as its simplicity. It was shown the assumptions associated with the linear model i.e. linearity of the model, errors with equal variance, and normal distribution of errors were valid. The linear model was developed on the logarithmic transformation of numerical features. Since the features were scaled, the absolute value of their coefficients represented their importance. Many second-degree terms had significant coefficients. The highest absolute value of coefficient among all features belonged to the interaction term between the logarithmic transformation of high school diploma and region west. The linear regression model makes it possible to calculate the change in the poverty level if one or group of features vary while the rest of features remain unchanged. In the end, the score of the test set was calculated; the score was quite close to the average 5-fold cross-validation score of the train set.

Report: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1alAh3-FzEKB7FJR3yVlArgoFr8lKQVjkWH6lXi2WNZ8/edit#

Presentation: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1n2ndkzaAhKQe5U4f8yinuyiILRjdMcoFBzxdVhMD3Ck/edit#slide=id.g4c413570da_0_5568
